hey this is presto Walker a circle with
radius one is tangent to two points of
the parabola y equals x squared what is
the area between the circle and the
parabola here's a diagram to illustrate
the problem we have the parabola y
equals x squared and then we have a
circle of radius one that's tangent to
the parabola at two points the question
is what's the area that's highlighted in
red in between the circle and the
parabola
I want to thank Chad bot Yolo for
sending me this puzzle can you figure it
out give this problem a try and when
you're ready keep watching the video for
the solution I'll proceed to find the
answer in a series of three steps well
first determine the center of the circle
then we'll find the intersection points
between the circle and the parabola
well then calculate the area in two
different ways well first find the area
using addition and subtraction of simple
shapes
well then also solve it using an
integral so let's proceed by finding the
center of the circle you can experiment
with where the circle could be once you
try and figure out where the circle
could be you'll come to the conclusion
the circle has to be in a particular
position to be tangent at two points the
circle has to be above the parabola its
center also has to be on the line x
equals 0 which means the center of the
circle has to be a point of the form 0
comma B so what's the value of B the
circles radius of 1 has to be the
minimal distance from the center of the
circle to the parabola so we can attempt
to solve for B by solving a minimization
problem we'll minimize the distance
between the center of the circle to the
parabola
a point on the parabola y equals x
squared will have a form x comma x
squared using the distance formula we
want to minimize the following function
but before we do that we can use a
little trick since distance is
non-negative it will be easier to
minimize the distance squared this will
allow us to get rid of the square root
so it'll be easier for us to take the
derivative and find the correct value of
B so let's do this we'll find the
critical values by solving for where the
derivative equals zero we don't put the
following equation we then factor out 2x
and we need to solve this equation for
where X leads it to be equal to zero
there are two possibilities one is that
two X could equal zero this would be an
X would equal zero we now take this
value and substitute it back into our
distance squared function this means the
distance squared will be equal to B
squared and notice the distance from the
center of the circle to the parabola
which will be also on the circle this
has to be equal to the radius squared of
the circle and we know the circle is a
radius of one so this means B squared
has to be equal to one this leads to two
possible values B equals plus 1 or B
equals minus 1 could these be the
possible center of the circle no a
circle centered at either 0 1 or 0
negative 1 will not be tangent at two
points of the parabola we could see this
geometrically a circle centered at 0
negative 1 will be tangent only at the
origin and then a circle centered at 0 1
will be tangent also at the origin but
it will also touch the parabola at two
other points 1 1 and negative 1 1 so
these are not possible solutions for our
circle being tangent to the parabola at
exactly two points
so we then consider the other
possibility what if one plus two times
the quantity x squared minus B equals
zero we can solve this equation to get
that x squared equals B minus one half
once again we substitute into the
distance squared function and this leads
to the equation that the distance
squared is equal to B minus one-fourth
which equals the radius squared which
equals one therefore B is equal to 5/4
when we try that it turns out to be a
sensible solution and this in fact is
the center of the circle now we need to
find the intersection points between the
circle and the parabola we have a circle
of radius one that's centered at zero
comma PI fourths this circle will have
an equation x squared plus the quantity
y minus five-fourths squared equals one
where will this intersect the parabola
where y equals x squared we can solve
this system of equations will substitute
in y equals x squared into the first
equation so we have y plus the quantity
Y minus five-fourths squared is equal to
one after a little bit of simplification
we get that Y minus 3/4 the quantity
squared is equal to zero and therefore Y
is equal to 3/4 y equals x squared so we
get that X is equal to negative square
root of 3 over 2 or X is equal to
positive square root of 3 over 2 so we
found our two intersection points we now
need to solve for the area so let's set
up a little bit of diagram using our
values of the intersection points
the red area can be found by addition
and subtraction of a few simple shapes
we'll set up that the red area is equal
to the area of this entire rectangle
minus the portions which do not belong
to the red area so we'll subtract the
area underneath the parabola and then we
need to subtract the area that's above
the circle this will be a circular
segment so what's the area of this
circular segment well we need to solve
for it using the areas of shapes that we
can calculate easily so this circular
segment can be calculated as follows we
take the circular sector originating
from the center of the circle and then
we'll subtract out this isosceles
triangle from the circular sector so
this circular segment is equal to the
area of the circular sector minus the
area of this triangle so we'll
substitute that in for the circular
segment and now we can simplify that a
red area is equal to the area of the
rectangle minus the area under the
parabola minus the area of this circular
sector plus the area of this triangle so
let's calculate for the area of each of
these shapes the rectangle has a length
of square root of 3 and a height of 3/4
so it's area will be 3/4 the square root
of 3 the area under the parabola can be
found using the integral of x squared
from negative square root of 3 over 2 to
positive square root of 3 over 2 this is
standard calculation we end up with
square root of 3 over 4 now the area of
the circular sector and the triangle
will will require a little bit of
geometry so let's draw this triangle
again we know that its radius is equal
to 1 because that's the radius of a
circle
so that's one length of the triangle
what are the other lengths well the
height will be five fourths minus three
fourths so that's one half finally the
base will have two segments of square
root of three over two now look at the
lengths of this triangle we have a
triangle with lengths square root of
three over two one half and 1 this is
the lengths of a special triangle each
half of this triangle is a 30-60-90
right triangle or in radians the angles
are PI over 6 PI over 3 and PI over 2 so
we know that this particular angle is PI
over 3 or 60 degrees and this angle is
also the same so now we know the central
angle of this sector the central angle
is 2 PI over 3 this circular sector has
a radius of 1 and the area of a circular
sector is 1/2 times R squared theta we
substitute in our values and we get the
area this circular sector is PI over 3
now we solve for the area of this
triangle it is a base of square root of
3 and height of 1/2 we use the formula
for the area of a triangle and
substitute in these values to get this
area is square root of 3 over 4 so now
we calculate the area of the red segment
using what we just calculated we can
cancel out the area under the parabola
with the area of the triangle it
actually turns out those are both equal
to the same value it's kind of an
interesting little piece of trivia so
now we have the area of this red segment
is equal to 3/4 square root of 3 minus
PI over 3 and that's approximately equal
to 0.25 1/8 and that's our answer so
this is one way to approach the problem
but we could have also approached it
using an integral remember the circle is
given by the following equation
well now solve for the lower half of
this circle by taking the negative
square root of that
equation so the lower half of the circle
is given by the equation 5/4 minus the
square root of 1 minus x squared we want
to solve for the area between this curve
and the parabola which is x squared so
we can set up a single integral which is
the difference between the lower half of
the circle and the parabola y equals x
squared and we compute that integral
between negative square root of 3 over 2
and positive square root of 3 over 2
this will also give us the area so how
do we calculate this integral we can
break down into three different terms
it'll be easier to calculate some of
these as separate integrals so we'll
break it off into three different
integrals the first integral is
straightforward to calculate and the
last integral is also straightforward to
calculate so we have 10 square root of 3
over 8 minus 2 square root of 3 over 8
which simplifies to be square root of 3
so our ultimate answer will be square
root of 3 minus this one somewhat
complicated integral so how can we
evaluate this integral this is a
textbook example for using a trig
substitution x equals sine theta this
means DX is equal to cosine theta
d-theta and if the x-values go between
negative square root of 3 over 2 and
positive square root of 3 over 2 that
means theta will go between negative PI
over 3 and positive PI over 3 so we do
this trig substitution and now we can
simplify this integral we use some
trigonometric identities and then we end
up with the integral of the cosine
squared of theta this is also a standard
thing to evaluate so we then evaluate
this integral and we end up that the
answer is the same as before 3/4 the
square root of 3 minus PI over 3 did you
figure it out
thanks for watching this video please
subscribe to my channel I make videos on
math you can catch me on my blog mind
your decisions if you
like this video you can support me on
patreon and you can check out my books
which are listed in the video
description you can also catch me on
social media either at pressure Walker
or at mind your decisions depending on
the site